General structure

I liked that there are 7 or 8 main headings in the table of contents,
but I felt slightly overloaded when trying to use it to determine the
structure of the book. Using the 7+/- 2 idea, I feel like a couple of
slots are being used by thoughts such as “what’s in it for me.. how
does this relate to the training I’m doing.. what do I want to get out
of the book and is there a section I can skip to first.. can this book
be used as reference?”. I personally prefer 4 or so over-arching
themes to group chapters. Also, in the opposite direction I like to
see each chapter broken up into a few headings — the subsections are
there, but you can’t see them until you get to them. This is entirely
my opinion and may not be true for others — maybe I’ve read too many
Microsoft Press books which seem to always be structured this way. The
title drew me in and the fact that it was short made me just want to
read the whole thing front-to-back in one sitting, which I did. I
became anxious to get to the live coding section, skipped pages 37 -
53 and then came back to 37. That being said, I like the order of the
book the way it is.

I love how you cite all sorts of references. In terms of style guides,
I am only familiar with APA and I haven’t used it in a very long time,
but I do like to see the year in-line with the reference. For example,
I was really curious to know when the Unix manuals were written, but
not bad enough to break the flow of the reading and head to the
references section. You’ve said the science changes often, so years
are important to me. Again, just my opinion, and others may not think
it’s as important. I like how you prime people right off the bat with
some key authors that you feel are worth reading. It’s always nice to
know a book isn’t the purported end but more of an entry into a
field. It served that purposes for me and feel as though I have a
model to use when approaching the field of learning.

Some random points

At the beginning I wasn’t sure what software carpentry was and the
significance of the references to the 2010 and 2012 versions were not
clear to me.

At first, I wasn’t sure what a call-out was and the first one on
profiles seems to come out of nowhere, but I was immediately drawn in
by it and found it interesting.

I love the idea of highlighting the behaviour of the instructor in
contrast to the actual content being taught. It’s a powerful point and
presented very well.

I liked the example checklists, but was not entirely sure that this
was something that you send you to attendees a day or so prior to the
training or during registration. Not an important point and it is
explained later on, but I was wondering exactly when it was supposed
to be done.

Not sure what the phrase “One sign that someone is a novice is that
their questions aren’t even wrong.” means.

Liked the Mark Twain quote.

On page 29-30 I wasn’t sure about the flow from the topic of sharing
teaching practices to lateral knowledge transfer.

In the learners profile section, I did not see the 4 headings you
referenced in the workshop, which were useful (background, prior
knowledge, ?, special considerations).

This book would be great as reference material.

Actions I'd like to propose as a result of reading this

This book got me thinking about how we can improve the administration
of workshops at rangle. We should formally register participants and
give them a checklist. Maybe we should have a general code of conduct
for learning sessions (similar to the Retrospective Prime Directive
that we already have) and remind people to review it upon
registration. Maybe we can let instructors/attendees modify it for
their own needs and provide their version upon registration. Rangle
might also benefit from having a database of a few example learner
profiles and a template based on the instructions in the book for
easily creating new ones in advance of setting up or running a
workshop.

(the mood it left me with)

I am inspired by the Japanese style of teachers learning socially and
saddened that I will be sending my kids into a school system where
teachers are expected to invent their own methods for teaching in
isolation. I'm sad for students and I'm also sad for people that have
chose to be teachers in Canada as the way our governemnts and their
unions work seems to failing us in a prety sever way. It's probably
good that this book is not as political as my comments are.

This book is extremely useful and I’m glad I read it. It has inspired
me to get some paper and start creating concept graphs. Also, the
step-by-step processes you have outlined throughout are very
useful. It’s taken me more than two weeks to start to get into the
mindset of a trainer from being purely in the “developer”
mindset. This book can help in making the shift as many of these
concepts are just foreign and/or long forgotten for people that don’t
spend any time doing training in their day-to-day work lives.

Errors

Typo. The rules #6 clarify => clarity

ready to stand up and teaching => teach

“chal:minute-cards” page 23

despite evidence of their effectiveness. Na ive => Naive page 29

page 52 Instead, they through => the go through
